accounts_and_support/index.rst, before:

Accounts and Support
####################

Request an account
==================

Before requesting an account, please read :ref:`our usage agreement for the LARCC system <usage-agreemet>`.
If you agree with the terms, then review the following instructions carefully. Keep in mind that
**each applicant must log in and complete their own account request using their unique ULINK account**.

**To obtain an account, you must either be a faculty member or be affiliated
with a faculty-led research project**.

..
  If you are employed by outside funding (e.g. grant-enabled student assistants or non-enrolled students),
  or are external to the university but have a working relationship for research purposes, then you may
  qualify for a *Sponsored account*. Refer to Section
  :ref:`Accounts for non-UofL but affiliated individuals <sponsored-accounts>`.

Accounts for UofL individuals
-----------------------------

If you are a faculty member,
you are considered the faculty lead/PI and should enter yourself in that role.
If you are not a faculty member, provide the name of the faculty lead/PI
for the research project you will be working on.

To request an HPC account:

#. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/277/Portal/Home/>`_ and
   log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.

#. Click on the **IT Service Catalog** Tab, Then on the **Accounts and Security** option.

    .. image:: images/ul_services_it_catalog_tab.png
      :width: 600
      :alt: UL Services IT Catalog - Accounts and Security

#. Click on **Request an HPC Account** and fill out the form that will pop-up.
   When filling out your request, be sure to indicate any additional systems (e.g., "bigdata")
   to which you are requesting access along with LARCC. Include these details in the
   **Please state the purpose for which the account is being requested** section,
   along with any other required information.

    .. image:: images/ul_services_accounts_request_hpc_account.png
      :width: 600
      :alt: UL Services IT Catalog - Request an HPC Account

..
  Accounts for non-UofL but affiliated individuals
  ------------------------------------------------
..
  You must obtain a ULINK account before proceeding with your HPC account request. 
  For additional details and access to the request form, 
  refer to the
  `Sponsorship Request for User Account section <https://louisville.edu/its/tech-support/accounts/accounts>`_.
..  
  .. image:: images/ul_its_sponsored_accounts.png
    :width: 600
    :alt: UL Services IT Catalog - Request an HPC Account
  
  Be sure to request both VPN and UofL email functionality for the sponsored account, as:
..  
  - VPN access is required to log in to research systems.
  - UofL email is needed to receive system status updates and sensitive security notifications.
..  
  Once your sponsored account is ready, email the Research Computing team at ithpc@louisville.edu,
  including your ULINK ID. We will then apply the final adjustments needed to enable you
  to submit an account request through the University's Ticketing System.
  After we reply confirming that your account is ready,
  log in to the Service Desk portal using your ULINK credentials.

UofL VPN Connection
===================

As part of the HPC onboarding process, you are set up with a University supplied VPN account.

**The VPN is required to connect to Research Computing Resources from off campus.**

To connect to the VPN for the first time:

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: Windows

    #. Browse to `https://vpn.louisville.edu <https://vpn.louisville.edu>`_ and log in.

    #. Choose a client based on your Operating System to download and install.

    #. When the client prompts for a login, the **Portal** parameter is **vpn.louisville.edu**

    When you have successfully connected, a **services connected** icon will appear in your taskbar

  .. tab:: Mac

    #. Browse to `https://vpn.louisville.edu <https://vpn.louisville.edu>`_ and log in.

    #. Choose a client based on your Operating System to download and install.

    #. When the client prompts for a login, the **Portal** parameter is **vpn.louisville.edu**

    When you have successfully connected, a **services connected** icon will appear in your taskbar

  .. tab:: Linux

    #. Create a ticket using the steps found below

    #. A member of the Research Computing team will help you in providing a client and the steps needed to
       configure it to work with your specific OS

More information can be found on the `University's VPN information page <https://louisville.edu/its/security/vpn/vpn>`_

.. _user_support_tickets:

Request Support (Tickets)
=========================

**When filling out Support Request forms, it is important to specify which cluster you are requesting support for**

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: Software
    
    This category includes installation of software, assistance with software purchases,
    bug reporting/debugging, troubleshooting and upgrading software. To issue a hardware request:

    #. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/277/Portal/Home/>`_ and
       log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.

    #. Click on **ITS Service Catalog** > **Enterprise Services** tab at the top of the page.

    #. Click **Request for Research Software Support**.

    #. Fill out the form.

  .. tab:: Hardware

    This category includes reporting hardware failures, access to the datacenter,
    placement of hardware (e.g. servers) in the datacenter, and assistance in purchasing equipment. 

    #. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/277/Portal/Home/>`_ and
       log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.
  
    #. Click on the **ITS Service Catalog** > **Enterprise Services** tab at the top of the page.

    #. Click **Request for Research Hardware Support**

    #. Fill out the form.

  .. tab:: General/Other
    
    This category is for anything else research computing related, but not encompassed in the other
    two categories (e.g., custom grant text, letters of support, or example citations and acknowledgements).

    #. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/277/Portal/Home/>`_ and
       log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.
  
    #. Click on the **Helpdesk** tab at the top of the page.
    
    #. Click **Request for Research Support**.
    
    #. Fill out the form.

Once you fill out the form, a confirmation will be sent to your UofL email. Likewise, any follow-ups from the
Research Computing team will be delivered to your email.

Commit message:

Adding info to request accounts in TeamDynamix

accounts_and_support/index.rst, after:

Accounts and Support
####################

Request an account
==================

Before requesting an account, please read :ref:`our usage agreement for the LARCC system <usage-agreemet>`.
If you agree with the terms, then review the following instructions carefully. Keep in mind that
**each applicant must log in and complete their own account request using their unique ULINK account**.

**To obtain an account, you must either be a faculty member or be affiliated
with a faculty-led research project**.

..
  If you are employed by outside funding (e.g. grant-enabled student assistants or non-enrolled students),
  or are external to the university but have a working relationship for research purposes, then you may
  qualify for a *Sponsored account*. Refer to Section
  :ref:`Accounts for non-UofL but affiliated individuals <sponsored-accounts>`.

Accounts for UofL individuals
-----------------------------

If you are a faculty member,
you are considered the faculty lead/PI and should enter yourself in that role.
If you are not a faculty member, provide the name of the faculty lead/PI
for the research project you will be working on.

To request an HPC account:

#. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/Home>`_ and
   log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.

   .. image:: images/ul_services_home.png
      :width: 600
      :alt: UL Services - Home

#. Scroll down to the **Featured Services** section and click on **Research Computing Support**, or
   search for *Research Computing Support*.

    .. image:: images/ul_featured_services.png
      :width: 600
      :alt: UL Services - Research Computing

#. Under the **Services** section, click on **High-Performance Computing (HPC)**

    .. image:: images/ul_research_computing_service_list.png
      :width: 600
      :alt: UL Services - Research Compuing Service List

#. Click on the **Request Service** button.

    .. image:: images/ul_research_computing_request_service.png
      :width: 600
      :alt: UL Services - Request an HPC Account

#. Under the **Ticketing Details** section, locate the **Access Areas** drop-down menu and select
   **Research Computing Account (Local HPC / Storage / Other Servers)**.

    .. image:: images/ul_research_computing_form.png
      :width: 600
      :alt: UL Services - Research Computing Form

#. Fill out the rest of the form as appropriate.

..
  Accounts for non-UofL but affiliated individuals
  ------------------------------------------------
..
  You must obtain a ULINK account before proceeding with your HPC account request. 
  For additional details and access to the request form, 
  refer to the
  `Sponsorship Request for User Account section <https://louisville.edu/its/tech-support/accounts/accounts>`_.
..  
  .. image:: images/ul_its_sponsored_accounts.png
    :width: 600
    :alt: UL Services IT Catalog - Request an HPC Account
  
  Be sure to request both VPN and UofL email functionality for the sponsored account, as:
..  
  - VPN access is required to log in to research systems.
  - UofL email is needed to receive system status updates and sensitive security notifications.
..  
  Once your sponsored account is ready, email the Research Computing team at ithpc@louisville.edu,
  including your ULINK ID. We will then apply the final adjustments needed to enable you
  to submit an account request through the University's Ticketing System.
  After we reply confirming that your account is ready,
  log in to the Service Desk portal using your ULINK credentials.

UofL VPN Connection
===================

As part of the HPC onboarding process, you are set up with a University supplied VPN account.

**The VPN is required to connect to Research Computing Resources from off campus.**

To connect to the VPN for the first time:

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: Windows

    #. Browse to `https://vpn.louisville.edu <https://vpn.louisville.edu>`_ and log in.

    #. Choose a client based on your Operating System to download and install.

    #. When the client prompts for a login, the **Portal** parameter is **vpn.louisville.edu**

    When you have successfully connected, a **services connected** icon will appear in your taskbar

  .. tab:: Mac

    #. Browse to `https://vpn.louisville.edu <https://vpn.louisville.edu>`_ and log in.

    #. Choose a client based on your Operating System to download and install.

    #. When the client prompts for a login, the **Portal** parameter is **vpn.louisville.edu**

    When you have successfully connected, a **services connected** icon will appear in your taskbar

  .. tab:: Linux

    #. Create a ticket using the steps found below

    #. A member of the Research Computing team will help you in providing a client and the steps needed to
       configure it to work with your specific OS

More information can be found on the `University's VPN information page <https://louisville.edu/its/security/vpn/vpn>`_

.. _user_support_tickets:

Request Support (Tickets)
=========================

**When filling out Support Request forms, it is important to specify which cluster you are requesting support for**

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: Software
    
    This category includes installation of software, assistance with software purchases,
    bug reporting/debugging, troubleshooting and upgrading software. To issue a hardware request:

    #. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/277/Portal/Home/>`_ and
       log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.

    #. Click on **ITS Service Catalog** > **Enterprise Services** tab at the top of the page.

    #. Click **Request for Research Software Support**.

    #. Fill out the form.

  .. tab:: Hardware

    This category includes reporting hardware failures, access to the datacenter,
    placement of hardware (e.g. servers) in the datacenter, and assistance in purchasing equipment. 

    #. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/277/Portal/Home/>`_ and
       log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.
  
    #. Click on the **ITS Service Catalog** > **Enterprise Services** tab at the top of the page.

    #. Click **Request for Research Hardware Support**

    #. Fill out the form.

  .. tab:: General/Other
    
    This category is for anything else research computing related, but not encompassed in the other
    two categories (e.g., custom grant text, letters of support, or example citations and acknowledgements).

    #. Navigate to the `University's Service Desk portal <https://service.louisville.edu/TDClient/277/Portal/Home/>`_ and
       log into the portal using your ULINK credentials.
  
    #. Click on the **Helpdesk** tab at the top of the page.
    
    #. Click **Request for Research Support**.
    
    #. Fill out the form.

Once you fill out the form, a confirmation will be sent to your UofL email. Likewise, any follow-ups from the
Research Computing team will be delivered to your email.
