gettingstarted/index.rst, before:

Getting Started
###############

HPC system overview
===================

About the cluster
-----------------

LARCC consists of 20 nodes that can be used for computation. These nodes are distributed in two queues
as indicated below:

.. list-table:: LARCC hardware specs
   :widths: 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Queue Name
     - Number of servers
     - Processor
     - CPU core frequency
     - CPU sockets per node
     - CPU cores per socket
     - Total CPU cores per node
     - Raw memory
     - Usable memory
     - GPU
     - GPU Memory
     - GPUs per node
     - Local storage per node
   * - compute
     - 10
     - AMD EPYC 9554
     - 3.1 to 3.75 GHz
     - 2
     - 64
     - 128
     - 512 GiB
     - 502 GiB
     - N/A
     - N/A
     - 0
     - 14TB NVMe
   * - gpu
     - 10
     - INTEL XEON GOLD 6542Y
     - 4.1 GHz
     - 2
     - 48
     - 96
     - 256 GiB
     - 250 GiB
     - NVIDIA H100 NVL
     - 95830 MiB
     - 2
     - 28TB NVMe

These nodes are named as follows:

- ``larcc-cpu1``, ``larcc-cpu2``, ..., ``larc-cpu10`` for nodes without any GPU.
- ``larcc-gpu1``, ``larcc-gpu2``, ..., ``larc-gpu10`` for nodes with GPUs.

In order to execute any kind of (scientific) software, such as Ansys, OpenFOAM, GROMACS, or others,
on these nodes, users must:

1. Log into a special node referred to hereinafter as the "login node" (see Section :ref:`logging-into-cluster` for more information).
2. Submit a *job declaration* to the scheduling system, `Slurm <https://slurm.schedmd.com/quickstart.html>`_. 
   Slurm ensures fair resource distribution among users by managing node allocation,
   CPU distribution, memory utilization, and other essential resources based on job requirements.

To prevent interference between users' jobs, access to nodes is restricted
to users with active jobs running on them. For example, if user "lk01" submits a job and
Slurm allocates ``larcc-cpu1`` for its execution, "lk01" will have exclusive access to log into ``larcc-cpu1``.

About Scientific Software
-------------------------

In Linux, program behavior is influenced by dynamic values called "environmental variables".
These variables can be created, modified, and removed as needed, shaping the functionality
of programs and services. For example, the ``PATH`` variable lists directories where binaries are stored.
When a command is executed, the system searches these directories for the corresponding binary.
If not found, it returns a "command not found" error.

Scientific software like GROMACS or OpenFOAM often define their own environmental variables,
which can be complex to manage. To simplify this, the cluster uses *Environmental Modules*
to dynamically adjust users' environments with modulefiles.

Users can explore available modules with the ``module available`` command and load
them using ``module load modulename``.

About Jobs
----------

Users can submit two types of jobs: interactive and batch.
Interactive jobs give direct access to the assigned node, allowing users to execute programs manually.
Batch jobs run autonomously via shell scripts without user intervention.

Batch jobs remain unaffected by disconnections, while interactive jobs may terminate.
To maintain continuity, users can use a terminal multiplexer like ``tmux``.
Running ``tmux`` before starting an interactive job creates
a persistent session that continues even if the connection is lost.

Quickstart
==========

.. _logging-into-cluster:

Logging into the cluster
------------------------

Upon creating an account, users are provided with a username and password, 
which they can utilize to access the cluster via SSH (Secure Shell Protocol).
The procedure entails employing an SSH client from their personal computers
to establish a connection with the login node. 

Using the command line
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Windows (versions 10 and 11)
inherently supports an SSH command-line client within PowerShell. Similarly, 
Mac and Linux based operating systems come equipped with a built-in SSH client
accessible via their respective terminals. 
The basic login process remains consistent across all of these platforms:

1. Launch the terminal on your personal computer.
2. Enter the ssh command using the following format: ``ssh username@hostname``. 
   In this particular scenario, the hostname is always ``larcc.hpc.louisville.edu``.
   For instance, if the user's name is "lk01", they would input
   ``ssh lk01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu``.
   
  .. image:: images/login_example.png
    :width: 600
    :alt: Example: cluster login

3. Provide your password and press Enter.

  .. image:: images/login_example_2.png
    :width: 600
    :alt: Example: logged into the cluster

Alternatively, users can opt for other popular SSH clients installed on their personal computers,
such as `MobaXterm <https://mobaxterm.mobatek.net/>`_ and `PuTTY <https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/latest.html>`_.
PuTTY boasts a straightforward and user-friendly interface, while MobaXterm offers a 
tabbed interface with enhanced functionality, including a dedicated file manager 
that simplifies file management on the cluster and facilitates seamless information
transfer between the personal computer and the cluster.

Using MobaXterm
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Click on "Session" at the top-left of the window

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_1.png
    :width: 800

2. Setup your username and the cluster hostname ``larcc.hpc.louisville.edu``

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_2.png
    :width: 800

3. A notice like the one below will appear the first time you connect to the cluster.
   Click "Accept".

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_3.png
    :width: 800

4. Write your password (it will not be displayed as you type it) and hit Enter

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_4.png
    :width: 800

Copying files to/from the cluster
---------------------------------

Using the command line
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The command ``scp`` (available on Windows, Mac and Linux based OSs) is the preferred way
to copy files to and from the cluster. See a comprehensive list of options at the
`scp guide <https://man.openbsd.org/scp>`_. Since a user's
home directory (``/home/<username>``, or simply ``~``) is shared across all nodes, users are encouraged
to use their home directories as a staging area for file transfers.

**Example:** Assume user "John Doe" is assigned cluster account ``jd01``. The code below
shows how John would copy the file ``C:\Users\johndoe\Downloads\workload.jou`` from his
personal computer to his home directory (``/home/jd01``) in the cluster using the 
``scp`` command in Windows PowerShell.

..  code-block:: powershell
    
    # John could also use ~ instead of /home/jd01. That is, the following is also valid:
    # scp C:\Users\johndoe\Downloads\workload.jou jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:~
    scp C:\Users\johndoe\Downloads\workload.jou jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:/home/jd01

Suppose John Doe ran a simulation and got the results stored at ``/home/jd01/results/sim_1_res.dat``
in the cluster. If he wants to copy these retults to the folder ``C:\Users\johndoe\Documents`` 
of his Windows PC, he would execute the command below from a PowerShell session:

..  code-block:: powershell
    
    # The following is also valid:
    # scp jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:~/results/sim_1_res.dat C:\Users\johndoe\Documents
    scp jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:/home/jd01/results/sim_1_res.dat C:\Users\johndoe\Documents

Using MobaXterm
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Downloading files or folders from the cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Locate the "File Explorer" from MobaXterm and navigate towards the location where the file
   or folder you want to download resides in.

2. Right click on the file or folder you want to download from the cluster and click on "Download".

Uploading files or folders to the cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Locate the "File Explorer" from MobaXterm and navigate towards the location where 
   you want to upload your files to.

2. Click on the upload icon within the "File Explorer" and select the file or folder you want to
   upload.

Using software installed in the cluster
---------------------------------------

List available software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use command ``module avail`` as shown in the example below:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example list of available software
    
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module av

    ------------------------- /opt/shared/modulefiles/auto/linux-rocky9-x86_64/Core --------------------------
       apptainer/1.3.4-gcc-11.5.0-as2nnsb                        miniforge3/24.3.0-0-gcc-11.5.0-wkw4vym
       cuda/12.8.1-gcc-11.5.0-xfem4z6                            mvapich/3.0-gcc-11.5.0-lkmtzx7
       hpl/2.3-oneapi-2025.0.0-intel-oneapi-mpi-e4nh4jf          nvhpc/25.3-gcc-11.5.0-mbzjfew
       intel-oneapi-compilers/2025.0.0-gcc-11.5.0-q7zplj3        openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
       intel-oneapi-mkl/2025.0.0-oneapi-2025.0.0-azdrlfn         openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp  (D)
       intel-oneapi-mpi/2021.14.0-oneapi-2025.0.0-qyvyj3p        python/3.12.10-oneapi-2025.0.0-zz5mjcp
       matlab/r2024b-gcc-11.5.0-3dizvwe                          r/4.4.1-gcc-11.5.0-56jqenf
       matlab/r2025a-gcc-11.5.0-cj4bjqf                   (D)

    --------------------------------- /usr/share/lmod/lmod/modulefiles/Core ----------------------------------
       lmod    settarg

      Where:
       D:  Default Module

Load software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Users **must** load programs with the ``module load <modulename>`` before launching them.
Multiple programs can be loaded at the same time, but there are cases where two or more may conflict.
For instance, programs ``openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl`` and ``openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp``
cannot be loaded together.
For such cases the program loaded last is used. An example of this is shown below:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example of conflicting programs

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp

    The following have been reloaded with a version change:
      1) openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl => openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$

.. warning::
    Programs **MUST** only be run through slurm, **NOT** on the login node (larcc-login1).
    Users can test their scripts using an interactive job first and then submit the appropriate
    batch job (See our :ref:`Slurm Queueing System Guide <slurm_guide>` for more details).

List currently loaded software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use command ``module list`` as shown in the example below:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example list of currently loaded software

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module list

    Currently Loaded Modules:
      1) glibc/2.34-gcc-11.5.0-4dat34u         (H)  10) openssl/3.2.2-gcc-11.5.0-czvghva    (H)
      2) gcc-runtime/11.5.0-gcc-11.5.0-svvevyo (H)  11) libevent/2.1.12-gcc-11.5.0-cufjpkl  (H)
      3) libpciaccess/0.17-gcc-11.5.0-jgqvvje  (H)  12) libfabric/1.22.0-gcc-11.5.0-5axk6y7 (H)
      4) libiconv/1.17-gcc-11.5.0-vmtcdle      (H)  13) numactl/2.0.18-gcc-11.5.0-zmb5tw7   (H)
      5) xz/5.4.6-gcc-11.5.0-7mfzihn           (H)  14) openssh/8.7p1-gcc-11.5.0-rryqbxc    (H)
      6) zlib-ng/2.2.1-gcc-11.5.0-44cipbd      (H)  15) pmix/5.0.3-gcc-11.5.0-zdm7pmx       (H)
      7) libxml2/2.13.4-gcc-11.5.0-olld6vt     (H)  16) slurm/24.11.4-gcc-11.5.0-tevb6bm    (H)
      8) ncurses/6.5-gcc-11.5.0-stitjip        (H)  17) ucx/1.17.0-gcc-11.5.0-l3qrneo       (H)
      9) hwloc/2.11.1-gcc-11.5.0-a6whu6s       (H)  18) openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl

      Where:
       H:  Hidden Module

.. note::

   In addition to ``openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl``, several other programs are listed.
   These are dependencies that the module automatically loads alongside OpenMPI.

   Dependencies marked with an *H* are **hidden by default**. 
   This means they will not appear when you run the ``module available`` command,
   even though they are still loaded and available for use.

Unloading software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use command ``module unload <modulefile>``. This command only unloads the
indicated program, but not its dependencies. To clean the environment and
unload all modules, users should use the command ``module purge``. Example:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example on how to unload software

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module list

    Currently Loaded Modules:
      1) glibc/2.34-gcc-11.5.0-4dat34u         (H)  10) openssl/3.2.2-gcc-11.5.0-czvghva    (H)
      2) gcc-runtime/11.5.0-gcc-11.5.0-svvevyo (H)  11) libevent/2.1.12-gcc-11.5.0-cufjpkl  (H)
      3) libpciaccess/0.17-gcc-11.5.0-jgqvvje  (H)  12) libfabric/1.22.0-gcc-11.5.0-5axk6y7 (H)
      4) libiconv/1.17-gcc-11.5.0-vmtcdle      (H)  13) numactl/2.0.18-gcc-11.5.0-zmb5tw7   (H)
      5) xz/5.4.6-gcc-11.5.0-7mfzihn           (H)  14) openssh/8.7p1-gcc-11.5.0-rryqbxc    (H)
      6) zlib-ng/2.2.1-gcc-11.5.0-44cipbd      (H)  15) pmix/5.0.3-gcc-11.5.0-zdm7pmx       (H)
      7) libxml2/2.13.4-gcc-11.5.0-olld6vt     (H)  16) slurm/24.11.4-gcc-11.5.0-tevb6bm    (H)
      8) ncurses/6.5-gcc-11.5.0-stitjip        (H)  17) ucx/1.17.0-gcc-11.5.0-l3qrneo       (H)
      9) hwloc/2.11.1-gcc-11.5.0-a6whu6s       (H)  18) openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl

      Where:
       H:  Hidden Module



    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module purge
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module list
    No modules loaded
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$

Queues and jobs
---------------

- The cluster has two queues named *compute* and *gpu*.
- To **see information about queues**, users can use the ``sinfo`` command.
- When users send jobs, they can monitor their job status using the ``squeue`` command.
- To **launch an interactive job**, users can user the
  ``srun --time=<walltime> --pty /bin/bash -i`` command.
  See Section :ref:`Starting an interactive job <interactive_job>` for more information.
- To **submit an unattended job**, users can use the command ``sbatch`` as follows: 
  ``sbatch /path/to/sbatch/script``.
  See Section :ref:`Submitting batch jobs <batch_job>` for more information
- To **cancel jobs**, users can use the ``scancel`` command as follows: ``scancel jobid``

Policies
========

Installing packages system-wide
-------------------------------

The Research Computing team reviews software installation requests on a case-by-case basis
to determine whether an application should be installed system-wide or is better suited for local installation
in a user's home directory. In the latter case, we are happy to provide guidance.

Please note that global installations can be time-consuming due to complex dependency chains.
If a package definition does not already exist, we must create one to automate the build process,
including definitions for all dependencies. Since these dependencies are often maintained by different teams,
compiling and integrating them can be challenging and time-intensive.

While environment modules make it easy to load software, they are not part of the package-building
or automation process.

Due to the high volume of requests, we prioritize faster solutions like Conda and
reserve global installations for cases where no suitable alternative exists.

Running applications on the login nodes
---------------------------------------

Users should avoid running resource-intensive workloads on the login nodes,
as this can degrade performance and hinder others from accessing the cluster or submitting jobs.
To maintain a stable and fair environment, the Research Computing Team reserves the right to terminate
any user processes on the login nodes that are found to negatively impact other users.

.. _resource_restrictions:

Resource restrictions
---------------------

.. note::

  Please note that exceptions to the restrictions described below **CAN** be made.

  If your workload needs to be given more time to run, you need to use more nodes than
  what is allowed by default, among others, please reach out to us by creating a ticket
  and we will be happy to evaluate your case.

Job runtime restrictions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- If the ``--time`` option is not specified when submitting a job,
  a default runtime of 12 hours is imposed on said job.
  This applies to both interactive and batch jobs.
- Jobs sent to the ``compute`` partition can only run for a maximum of 72 hours.
- Jobs sent to the ``gpu`` partition can only run for a maximum of 48 hours.
- Users can use a maximum of 2 nodes (across all partitions) at a given time. For example:

  - Consider user *jd01* submits 2 jobs named *A* and *B* such that
    job *A* requests a node from the ``compute`` partition and *B* from the ``gpu`` partition.
    Once both jobs start running, any subsequent job *jd01* submits will be queued
    (i.e. placed in ``PENDING``, or ``PD``, status). Here is an example of how the
    output of the ``squeue`` command would look like:

    .. code-block:: text

      JOBID PARTITION     NAME     USER ST       TIME  NODES NODELIST(REASON)
        800   compute        A     jd01  R 1-21:32:01      1 larcc-cpu1
        799       gpu        B     jd01  R 1-21:32:22      1 larcc-gpu1
        821       gpu        C     jd01 PD       0:00      1 (QOSMaxNodePerUserLimit)

- Users can submit a maximum of 20 jobs across all partitions.

Storage restrictions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- ``home`` storage has a quota of 1TB per user.
- If multiple users from a research lab require a shared space where they can all colaborate,
  their PI (i.e. research coordinator, advisor, etc.) must reach out to us through a :ref:`ticket <user_support_tickets>`. We
  will then evaluate the case and discuss storage capacity, allowed users, among others.

For more information about capacity, storage types, etc., users are encouraged to read
:ref:`our storage guide <storage-on-compute-nodes>`.

Commit message:

Adding note on usage agreement

gettingstarted/index.rst, after:

Getting Started
###############

.. _usage-agreemet:

Usage Agreement
===============

Please ensure that you have read :ref:`Zurada's System Use Policies <zurada_system_use_policies>`
and have agreed to it before requesting an account.

HPC system overview
===================

About the cluster
-----------------

LARCC consists of 20 nodes that can be used for computation. These nodes are distributed in two queues
as indicated below:

.. list-table:: LARCC hardware specs
   :widths: 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Queue Name
     - Number of servers
     - Processor
     - CPU core frequency
     - CPU sockets per node
     - CPU cores per socket
     - Total CPU cores per node
     - Raw memory
     - Usable memory
     - GPU
     - GPU Memory
     - GPUs per node
     - Local storage per node
   * - compute
     - 10
     - AMD EPYC 9554
     - 3.1 to 3.75 GHz
     - 2
     - 64
     - 128
     - 512 GiB
     - 502 GiB
     - N/A
     - N/A
     - 0
     - 14TB NVMe
   * - gpu
     - 10
     - INTEL XEON GOLD 6542Y
     - 4.1 GHz
     - 2
     - 48
     - 96
     - 256 GiB
     - 250 GiB
     - NVIDIA H100 NVL
     - 95830 MiB
     - 2
     - 28TB NVMe

These nodes are named as follows:

- ``larcc-cpu1``, ``larcc-cpu2``, ..., ``larc-cpu10`` for nodes without any GPU.
- ``larcc-gpu1``, ``larcc-gpu2``, ..., ``larc-gpu10`` for nodes with GPUs.

In order to execute any kind of (scientific) software, such as Ansys, OpenFOAM, GROMACS, or others,
on these nodes, users must:

1. Log into a special node referred to hereinafter as the "login node" (see Section :ref:`logging-into-cluster` for more information).
2. Submit a *job declaration* to the scheduling system, `Slurm <https://slurm.schedmd.com/quickstart.html>`_. 
   Slurm ensures fair resource distribution among users by managing node allocation,
   CPU distribution, memory utilization, and other essential resources based on job requirements.

To prevent interference between users' jobs, access to nodes is restricted
to users with active jobs running on them. For example, if user "lk01" submits a job and
Slurm allocates ``larcc-cpu1`` for its execution, "lk01" will have exclusive access to log into ``larcc-cpu1``.

About Scientific Software
-------------------------

In Linux, program behavior is influenced by dynamic values called "environmental variables".
These variables can be created, modified, and removed as needed, shaping the functionality
of programs and services. For example, the ``PATH`` variable lists directories where binaries are stored.
When a command is executed, the system searches these directories for the corresponding binary.
If not found, it returns a "command not found" error.

Scientific software like GROMACS or OpenFOAM often define their own environmental variables,
which can be complex to manage. To simplify this, the cluster uses *Environmental Modules*
to dynamically adjust users' environments with modulefiles.

Users can explore available modules with the ``module available`` command and load
them using ``module load modulename``.

About Jobs
----------

Users can submit two types of jobs: interactive and batch.
Interactive jobs give direct access to the assigned node, allowing users to execute programs manually.
Batch jobs run autonomously via shell scripts without user intervention.

Batch jobs remain unaffected by disconnections, while interactive jobs may terminate.
To maintain continuity, users can use a terminal multiplexer like ``tmux``.
Running ``tmux`` before starting an interactive job creates
a persistent session that continues even if the connection is lost.

Quickstart
==========

.. _logging-into-cluster:

Logging into the cluster
------------------------

Upon creating an account, users are provided with a username and password, 
which they can utilize to access the cluster via SSH (Secure Shell Protocol).
The procedure entails employing an SSH client from their personal computers
to establish a connection with the login node. 

Using the command line
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Windows (versions 10 and 11)
inherently supports an SSH command-line client within PowerShell. Similarly, 
Mac and Linux based operating systems come equipped with a built-in SSH client
accessible via their respective terminals. 
The basic login process remains consistent across all of these platforms:

1. Launch the terminal on your personal computer.
2. Enter the ssh command using the following format: ``ssh username@hostname``. 
   In this particular scenario, the hostname is always ``larcc.hpc.louisville.edu``.
   For instance, if the user's name is "lk01", they would input
   ``ssh lk01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu``.
   
  .. image:: images/login_example.png
    :width: 600
    :alt: Example: cluster login

3. Provide your password and press Enter.

  .. image:: images/login_example_2.png
    :width: 600
    :alt: Example: logged into the cluster

Alternatively, users can opt for other popular SSH clients installed on their personal computers,
such as `MobaXterm <https://mobaxterm.mobatek.net/>`_ and `PuTTY <https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/latest.html>`_.
PuTTY boasts a straightforward and user-friendly interface, while MobaXterm offers a 
tabbed interface with enhanced functionality, including a dedicated file manager 
that simplifies file management on the cluster and facilitates seamless information
transfer between the personal computer and the cluster.

Using MobaXterm
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Click on "Session" at the top-left of the window

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_1.png
    :width: 800

2. Setup your username and the cluster hostname ``larcc.hpc.louisville.edu``

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_2.png
    :width: 800

3. A notice like the one below will appear the first time you connect to the cluster.
   Click "Accept".

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_3.png
    :width: 800

4. Write your password (it will not be displayed as you type it) and hit Enter

  .. image:: images/mobaxterm_conn_setup_4.png
    :width: 800

Copying files to/from the cluster
---------------------------------

Using the command line
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The command ``scp`` (available on Windows, Mac and Linux based OSs) is the preferred way
to copy files to and from the cluster. See a comprehensive list of options at the
`scp guide <https://man.openbsd.org/scp>`_. Since a user's
home directory (``/home/<username>``, or simply ``~``) is shared across all nodes, users are encouraged
to use their home directories as a staging area for file transfers.

**Example:** Assume user "John Doe" is assigned cluster account ``jd01``. The code below
shows how John would copy the file ``C:\Users\johndoe\Downloads\workload.jou`` from his
personal computer to his home directory (``/home/jd01``) in the cluster using the 
``scp`` command in Windows PowerShell.

..  code-block:: powershell
    
    # John could also use ~ instead of /home/jd01. That is, the following is also valid:
    # scp C:\Users\johndoe\Downloads\workload.jou jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:~
    scp C:\Users\johndoe\Downloads\workload.jou jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:/home/jd01

Suppose John Doe ran a simulation and got the results stored at ``/home/jd01/results/sim_1_res.dat``
in the cluster. If he wants to copy these retults to the folder ``C:\Users\johndoe\Documents`` 
of his Windows PC, he would execute the command below from a PowerShell session:

..  code-block:: powershell
    
    # The following is also valid:
    # scp jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:~/results/sim_1_res.dat C:\Users\johndoe\Documents
    scp jd01@larcc.hpc.louisville.edu:/home/jd01/results/sim_1_res.dat C:\Users\johndoe\Documents

Using MobaXterm
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Downloading files or folders from the cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Locate the "File Explorer" from MobaXterm and navigate towards the location where the file
   or folder you want to download resides in.

2. Right click on the file or folder you want to download from the cluster and click on "Download".

Uploading files or folders to the cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Locate the "File Explorer" from MobaXterm and navigate towards the location where 
   you want to upload your files to.

2. Click on the upload icon within the "File Explorer" and select the file or folder you want to
   upload.

Using software installed in the cluster
---------------------------------------

List available software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use command ``module avail`` as shown in the example below:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example list of available software
    
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module av

    ------------------------- /opt/shared/modulefiles/auto/linux-rocky9-x86_64/Core --------------------------
       apptainer/1.3.4-gcc-11.5.0-as2nnsb                        miniforge3/24.3.0-0-gcc-11.5.0-wkw4vym
       cuda/12.8.1-gcc-11.5.0-xfem4z6                            mvapich/3.0-gcc-11.5.0-lkmtzx7
       hpl/2.3-oneapi-2025.0.0-intel-oneapi-mpi-e4nh4jf          nvhpc/25.3-gcc-11.5.0-mbzjfew
       intel-oneapi-compilers/2025.0.0-gcc-11.5.0-q7zplj3        openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
       intel-oneapi-mkl/2025.0.0-oneapi-2025.0.0-azdrlfn         openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp  (D)
       intel-oneapi-mpi/2021.14.0-oneapi-2025.0.0-qyvyj3p        python/3.12.10-oneapi-2025.0.0-zz5mjcp
       matlab/r2024b-gcc-11.5.0-3dizvwe                          r/4.4.1-gcc-11.5.0-56jqenf
       matlab/r2025a-gcc-11.5.0-cj4bjqf                   (D)

    --------------------------------- /usr/share/lmod/lmod/modulefiles/Core ----------------------------------
       lmod    settarg

      Where:
       D:  Default Module

Load software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Users **must** load programs with the ``module load <modulename>`` before launching them.
Multiple programs can be loaded at the same time, but there are cases where two or more may conflict.
For instance, programs ``openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl`` and ``openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp``
cannot be loaded together.
For such cases the program loaded last is used. An example of this is shown below:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example of conflicting programs

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp

    The following have been reloaded with a version change:
      1) openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl => openmpi/5.0.5-oneapi-2025.0.0-ibqgcsp

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$

.. warning::
    Programs **MUST** only be run through slurm, **NOT** on the login node (larcc-login1).
    Users can test their scripts using an interactive job first and then submit the appropriate
    batch job (See our :ref:`Slurm Queueing System Guide <slurm_guide>` for more details).

List currently loaded software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use command ``module list`` as shown in the example below:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example list of currently loaded software

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module list

    Currently Loaded Modules:
      1) glibc/2.34-gcc-11.5.0-4dat34u         (H)  10) openssl/3.2.2-gcc-11.5.0-czvghva    (H)
      2) gcc-runtime/11.5.0-gcc-11.5.0-svvevyo (H)  11) libevent/2.1.12-gcc-11.5.0-cufjpkl  (H)
      3) libpciaccess/0.17-gcc-11.5.0-jgqvvje  (H)  12) libfabric/1.22.0-gcc-11.5.0-5axk6y7 (H)
      4) libiconv/1.17-gcc-11.5.0-vmtcdle      (H)  13) numactl/2.0.18-gcc-11.5.0-zmb5tw7   (H)
      5) xz/5.4.6-gcc-11.5.0-7mfzihn           (H)  14) openssh/8.7p1-gcc-11.5.0-rryqbxc    (H)
      6) zlib-ng/2.2.1-gcc-11.5.0-44cipbd      (H)  15) pmix/5.0.3-gcc-11.5.0-zdm7pmx       (H)
      7) libxml2/2.13.4-gcc-11.5.0-olld6vt     (H)  16) slurm/24.11.4-gcc-11.5.0-tevb6bm    (H)
      8) ncurses/6.5-gcc-11.5.0-stitjip        (H)  17) ucx/1.17.0-gcc-11.5.0-l3qrneo       (H)
      9) hwloc/2.11.1-gcc-11.5.0-a6whu6s       (H)  18) openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl

      Where:
       H:  Hidden Module

.. note::

   In addition to ``openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl``, several other programs are listed.
   These are dependencies that the module automatically loads alongside OpenMPI.

   Dependencies marked with an *H* are **hidden by default**. 
   This means they will not appear when you run the ``module available`` command,
   even though they are still loaded and available for use.

Unloading software
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use command ``module unload <modulefile>``. This command only unloads the
indicated program, but not its dependencies. To clean the environment and
unload all modules, users should use the command ``module purge``. Example:

..  code-block:: bash
  :caption: Example on how to unload software

    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module load openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module list

    Currently Loaded Modules:
      1) glibc/2.34-gcc-11.5.0-4dat34u         (H)  10) openssl/3.2.2-gcc-11.5.0-czvghva    (H)
      2) gcc-runtime/11.5.0-gcc-11.5.0-svvevyo (H)  11) libevent/2.1.12-gcc-11.5.0-cufjpkl  (H)
      3) libpciaccess/0.17-gcc-11.5.0-jgqvvje  (H)  12) libfabric/1.22.0-gcc-11.5.0-5axk6y7 (H)
      4) libiconv/1.17-gcc-11.5.0-vmtcdle      (H)  13) numactl/2.0.18-gcc-11.5.0-zmb5tw7   (H)
      5) xz/5.4.6-gcc-11.5.0-7mfzihn           (H)  14) openssh/8.7p1-gcc-11.5.0-rryqbxc    (H)
      6) zlib-ng/2.2.1-gcc-11.5.0-44cipbd      (H)  15) pmix/5.0.3-gcc-11.5.0-zdm7pmx       (H)
      7) libxml2/2.13.4-gcc-11.5.0-olld6vt     (H)  16) slurm/24.11.4-gcc-11.5.0-tevb6bm    (H)
      8) ncurses/6.5-gcc-11.5.0-stitjip        (H)  17) ucx/1.17.0-gcc-11.5.0-l3qrneo       (H)
      9) hwloc/2.11.1-gcc-11.5.0-a6whu6s       (H)  18) openmpi/5.0.5-gcc-11.5.0-5zz5ozl

      Where:
       H:  Hidden Module



    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module purge
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$ module list
    No modules loaded
    [user@larcc-login1 ~]$

Queues and jobs
---------------

- The cluster has two queues named *compute* and *gpu*.
- To **see information about queues**, users can use the ``sinfo`` command.
- When users send jobs, they can monitor their job status using the ``squeue`` command.
- To **launch an interactive job**, users can user the
  ``srun --time=<walltime> --pty /bin/bash -i`` command.
  See Section :ref:`Starting an interactive job <interactive_job>` for more information.
- To **submit an unattended job**, users can use the command ``sbatch`` as follows: 
  ``sbatch /path/to/sbatch/script``.
  See Section :ref:`Submitting batch jobs <batch_job>` for more information
- To **cancel jobs**, users can use the ``scancel`` command as follows: ``scancel jobid``

Policies
========

Installing packages system-wide
-------------------------------

The Research Computing team reviews software installation requests on a case-by-case basis
to determine whether an application should be installed system-wide or is better suited for local installation
in a user's home directory. In the latter case, we are happy to provide guidance.

Please note that global installations can be time-consuming due to complex dependency chains.
If a package definition does not already exist, we must create one to automate the build process,
including definitions for all dependencies. Since these dependencies are often maintained by different teams,
compiling and integrating them can be challenging and time-intensive.

While environment modules make it easy to load software, they are not part of the package-building
or automation process.

Due to the high volume of requests, we prioritize faster solutions like Conda and
reserve global installations for cases where no suitable alternative exists.

Running applications on the login nodes
---------------------------------------

Users should avoid running resource-intensive workloads on the login nodes,
as this can degrade performance and hinder others from accessing the cluster or submitting jobs.
To maintain a stable and fair environment, the Research Computing Team reserves the right to terminate
any user processes on the login nodes that are found to negatively impact other users.

.. _resource_restrictions:

Resource restrictions
---------------------

.. note::

  Please note that exceptions to the restrictions described below **CAN** be made.

  If your workload needs to be given more time to run, you need to use more nodes than
  what is allowed by default, among others, please reach out to us by creating a ticket
  and we will be happy to evaluate your case.

Job runtime restrictions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- If the ``--time`` option is not specified when submitting a job,
  a default runtime of 12 hours is imposed on said job.
  This applies to both interactive and batch jobs.
- Jobs sent to the ``compute`` partition can only run for a maximum of 72 hours.
- Jobs sent to the ``gpu`` partition can only run for a maximum of 48 hours.
- Users can use a maximum of 2 nodes (across all partitions) at a given time. For example:

  - Consider user *jd01* submits 2 jobs named *A* and *B* such that
    job *A* requests a node from the ``compute`` partition and *B* from the ``gpu`` partition.
    Once both jobs start running, any subsequent job *jd01* submits will be queued
    (i.e. placed in ``PENDING``, or ``PD``, status). Here is an example of how the
    output of the ``squeue`` command would look like:

    .. code-block:: text

      JOBID PARTITION     NAME     USER ST       TIME  NODES NODELIST(REASON)
        800   compute        A     jd01  R 1-21:32:01      1 larcc-cpu1
        799       gpu        B     jd01  R 1-21:32:22      1 larcc-gpu1
        821       gpu        C     jd01 PD       0:00      1 (QOSMaxNodePerUserLimit)

- Users can submit a maximum of 20 jobs across all partitions.

Storage restrictions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- ``home`` storage has a quota of 1TB per user.
- If multiple users from a research lab require a shared space where they can all colaborate,
  their PI (i.e. research coordinator, advisor, etc.) must reach out to us through a :ref:`ticket <user_support_tickets>`. We
  will then evaluate the case and discuss storage capacity, allowed users, among others.

For more information about capacity, storage types, etc., users are encouraged to read
:ref:`our storage guide <storage-on-compute-nodes>`.
